---
layout: post
title: PIHOLE
tags: pihole ads block
categories: table
---

#Adding Pihole as DNS for local network

Decided to add back in the Pihole into my local network since I am currently studying for a Network+ cert and thought this would be fun to configure and mess around with. I however forgot what my setup was last time so decided I would document it this time. Would also be good to document development on my messy spaghetti repos for other projects so will be good practice and habit forming.

##Raspberry Pi

So last time I put Pihole on a raspberry pi that I had setup to take daily photos of my plants (I should document that project when I add some CV to alert me of changes in the plants or when I add in a water/moisture sensor). This seemed to work fine, I recall memory usage and temps weren't that high so I did the same this time.

##Setup - the easy part
Luckily setup of pihole is pretty simple if you are deploying it directly to a supported operating system such as the raspbian OS. Following the setup guide here :[one-step-automated-install](https://github.com/pi-hole/pi-hole/#one-step-automated-install) I had the project cloned and ran the bash script with no issues. Of course before running this I knew I needed a static IP so that I could direct my internet devices to the pihole instead of the default DNS from the ISP or any other public DNS like google. To do this I ran the following commands to get the various ip addresses of the device, network interface and edit the config files to setup the static ip.

###Static IP setup
IP address of device
>hostname -I

IP address of default network interface
>ip r | grep default

Name of default network interface
>ip r | grep '^default' | grep -o '[^ ]*$'

IP address for DNS Address 'nameserver'
>sudo nano /etc/resolv.conf
Find the name server address

setup static IP
>sudo nano /etc/dhcpcd.conf
Edit file to add in interface name, static ip address you want, the default network interface 'router' and the domain name server ip. File should already have comments in it to show the layout required

I could have also done this via my router setup GUI but I enjoy the CLI.

###Pihole basic setup
Now that the static IP is configured running the basic install bash script was quite simple, just follow the prompts and remember to write down the password for the web gui interface. If you forget you can always run '''sudo pihole -a -p''' to reset the password.

##Configuring DNS - the messy part
The messy part is setting the DNS server for the devices. So what I understand is that for a small private or SOHO network the router would be a multilayer device handling the switching for layer 2 for local devices and also ip addressing for the layer 3 routing activities such as connecting to the internet. To handle ip addressing routers typically run a DHCP server to serve up ip addresses to devices on a timed lease. At this time the DNS server IP address is also provided.
>router to device: here's your IP address for the local network and the DNS ip address for name resolution
By default the DNS address is usually the default ip address setup by your router device or ISP. To change this I logged into my router, an Amplify router in this case, and changed the primary DNS address to be my pihole's static IP address and then had the secondary to be google's DNS of 8.8.8.8 in case my pihole overheated or I took it down for maintenance/upgrade. This should then provide the pihole address as the DNS server to all devices connected to the router in the DHCP lease process and therefore block all urls on adlists. The problem is that since all the DNS requests go through my router pihole only sees one device as issuing url requests. Also since I've long disliked using ISP DNS servers I'd already changed the DNS server from automatic to googles 8.8.8.8 in my IPv4 settings for most of my devices. 

So...

For these devices I just changed them back to the 'obtain DNS address automatically' which lets my router then direct them to the pihole without needing to configure on client side in case I later change the pihole address. I checked this on the devices by running 'ipconfig /all | findstr "DNS Servers"' which should show the ip address of the pihole. You can run 'ipconfig /all' and manually find the DNS Servers to see the ip address that way too which will show the second line which is the fallback address provided by the router. For all other smart devices like mobile devices the DHCP process should automatically pass out the pihole address.

###Next Problem - device names on pihole
So since devices are redirected to the pihole by the amplify router pihole registers these queries as all coming from the router. To fix this issue I needed to check on an option on the router to 'Bypass DNS cache' which ensures each request is not checked against a cache in the router and to instead use upstream DNS which in this case is the pihole address.








